SOURCE: https://web.archive.org/web/2024/https://www.nhp.gov.in/disease/neurological/japanese-encephalitis
TITLE: NHP_Japanese_Encephalitis
SOURCE_TAG: nhp
SCRAPED: 2026-06-01 09:45:53.385186

MENU
Home
About NHP
Organization Chart
Quick Navigation
Healthy Lifestyle
Adolescent Health
Women's Health
Pregnancy
Travel Health
More
Oral Health
Symptoms one should not ignore
Healthy Nutrition
Healthy Diet
Alcohol Use Disorder
Disease/ Conditions Information
Disease / Conditions : A-Z
Drugs and Pharmaceuticals
First Aid
Interactive Tutorials
Public Health Alerts
Directory Services and Regulations
Committees and Commissions
Directory Services
Health Policies
Standards and Protocols
Governance / Laws / Bills / Acts
Redressal Mechanism
Insurance Schemes
Professional Enhancement
Careers
e-Learning
Professional news
Electronic Health Record Standards For India Helpdesk
Professional Resources
AYUSH
Ayurveda
Yoga
Unani
Siddha
Homoeopathy
Naturopathy
Spirituality and Health
Miscellaneous
Disaster Management
Health Programmes
General Forum
Professional Forum
General News
More
Healthcare Innovations
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
Universal Health Coverage
External Useful Links
Useful Links
State Health Websites
m-Health
Telemedicine
Donations
Emergency Helpline
Health Widgets
Notifications from Health Ministry
Remote Medical Devices
Feedback
FAQ's
Tenders
Contact Us
Healthy India
Close Menu
Home
Disease A-Z
J
Japanese Encephalitis
Introduction
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Management
Complications
Prevention
Japanese encephalitis(JE) is a viral disease that infects animals and humans. It is transmitted by mosquitoes in humans causing inflammation of the membranes around the brain.
Japanese encephalitis
is a leading cause of viral encephalitis in Asia generally spread from western pacific region in east to Pakistan in west and from Korea in north to Papua New Guinea in south.
Japanese encephalitis is a disease caused by a flavi virus that affects the membranes around the brain. Generally infections caused by
Japanese encephalitis
virus are mild (fever and headache) or without apparent symptoms, but sometimes 1 in 200 infections can result in severe disease characterized by rapid onset of high grade fever, headache, neck stiffness, disorientation, coma, seizures, spastic paralysis and death.
National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme
Case Management of Acute Encephalitis Syndrome /
Japanese encephalitis
References:
www.who.int
www.cdc.gov
www.nhs.uk
The content of this module has been validated by Dr. Deepak Raut, Vardhman Mahavir Medical College and Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi on 30th November 2014.
Recent Updates
Guidelines for prevention and control of Japanese encephalitis
(link is external)
Clinical management of Japanese encephalitis
(link is external)
Operational Guide Japanese encephalitis vaccination in India
(link is external)
Japanese encephalitis –Indian Medical Research Council
(link is external)
Japanese encephalitis has an incubation period of 5 to 15 days and the majority of infections are asymptomatic i.e. only 1 in 250 infections develop into encephalitis.
Intial symptoms include:
A high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above
Headache
Feeling sick
Di
arrhoea
Muscle pain
In rare cases,
these initial symptoms last for a few days and then develop into serious symptoms:
Seizures (fits)
Changes in mental state, which can range from mild confusion to being very agitated or falling into a coma
Uncontrollable shaking of body parts (tremor)
Losing the ability to speak
Muscle weakness
Abnormally tense muscles (hypertonia)
Movement problems, such as shaking, stiffness, slowness of movement or paralysis
Difficulties in controlling the movements of the eyes
Difficulties in controlling the muscles of the face
Reference:
www.nhs.uk
Japanese encephalitis is caused by a flavi virus. This type of virus can affect both animals and humans. The virus is passed on to humans from animals through an infected mosquito.
Risk factors includes:
The region you visit
The time of year you visit
The activities you do
Reference:
www.nhs.uk
Blood tests
: To know the antibodies present in the blood.
Lumbar puncture
: It is also done to check for antibodies in CSF and spinal fluid.
Scans
: In case of brain encephalitis:
A computerized tomography (CT) scan, which takes a series of X-rays of body at slightly different angles to produce a clear image of the inside of body
A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, which uses a strong magnetic field and radio waves to produce detailed images of the inside of body
NHP provides indicative information for better understanding of health. For any diagnosis and treatment purpose you should consult your physician.
References:
www.cdc.gov
www.nhs.uk
There is no specific treatment for Japanese encephalitis, supportive treatment is provided. Measures can be taken to control symptoms and prevent complications from developing.
NHP provides indicative information for better understanding of health. For any diagnosis and treatment purpose you should consult your physician.
It can lead to mild complications like:
Uncontrollable shaking of the hands
Changes to personality
Muscle weakness and twitching in the arms and hands.
Moderate disability can take the form of:
Mild learning difficulties
Paralysis of a single limb
Weakness on one side of the body
Prevention and control measures for Japanese Encephalitis (JE):
(A)
At Individual Level
•
Adopt measures to reduce vector density.
•
Take personal protection measures against mosquito bites.
•
Wear proper clothing to reduce mosquito bites specially during peak biting hours.
•
Use of mosquito repellent creams, liquids, coils, mats etc.
•
Use insecticide treated mosquito bed nets.
•
Sleeping in rooms with close-fitting windows and doors.
•
Spraying the room with insecticide specially in the early evening.
•
Screening of the houses with wire mesh.
•
DEET (diethyltoluamide) is most effective repellents and it is available in sprays, roll-ons, sticks and creams.
•
Japanese encephalitis (JE) vaccination is an important tool for prevention. Three doses are given to an individual & vaccine can prevent Japanese encephalitis (JE) for a number of years.
(B) In the Community
•
Malathion fogging during outbreaks.
•
Sensitizing and involving the community for detection of vector.
•
Adopt Eco-management system to reduce mosquito breeding.
•
From human dwellings piggeries should be kept away,at least 4-5 kms.
•
The place around the Hand Pump should be properly cemented and   along with drainage system.
(C) Prevention During Travel
•
If travelling, try to find out the Japanese encephalitis (JE) risk in that particular area and take the advice from doctor before visiting that area.
(D) Prevention of Japanese Encephalitis (JE) during Pregnancy
•
Use of treated nets/LLINs(Long Lasting Insecticidal Nets).
•
All the personal preventions as mentioned above.
Some Do's and Don't
•
Don't spray/cream insect repellent directly onto your face, spray it onto your hands and then apply it to your face.
•
Do not use it on cuts and wounds.
•
Avoid area around eyes, lips, mouth and ears canal.
•
Help children and youngsters to apply repellent. Don't allow young children to apply it themselves.
•
Apply insect repellent  after applying sunscreen.
•
Wash your hands thoroughly after use.
•
Wash the repellent off your skin with soap.
•
Always follow the instructions written on the repellent.
Reference:
www.nvbdcp.gov.in/
www.nhs.uk
www.cdc.gov
www.vaccineindia.org
Related Pages
જાપાનીઝ એન્સેફીલીટીસ (જેઈ)
Japanese Encephalitis
JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS
Herpes Simplex
Small Bite, Big Threats
Travel Health
ਯਾਤਰਾ ਸੰਬੰਧੀ ਸਿਹਤ
পর্যটনস্বাস্থ্য
મુસાફરી આરોગ્ય
National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme
यात्रा स्वास्थ्य
Universal Immunisation Programme
Mission Indradhanush
Neonatal Conjunctivitis
papilloedema
Moolai suram (Encephalitis)
Immunization
Know more about Mosquito
Immunization
International Day of Persons with Disabilities
CREATED / VALIDATED BY
: NHP CC DC
LAST UPDATED ON
: Jan 20, 2016
Discussion
You would need to
login
or
signup
to start a Discussion
Write your comments
This question is for preventing automated spam submissions
The content on this page has been supervised by the Nodal Officer, Project Director and Assistant Director (Medical) of Centre for Health Informatics. Relevant references are cited on each page.